# create a lab14 database
CREATE DATABASE lab14;

# use the schema.sql and seed.sql file in the lab folder to populate new database from the terminal 
psql -f /data/schema.sql -d lab14
psql -f /data/seed.sql -d lab14

# verify that the lab-14 DB if it has contents:
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM books;

# creating a copy of the database to normalize it:
CREATE DATABASE lab14_normal WITH TEMPLATE lab14;

# Database Migration
# create a second table in the lab14_normal database named authors.
CREATE TABLE AUTHORS (id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, name VARCHAR(255));

# This query will use a simple subquery to retrieve unique author values from the books table and insert each one into the authors table in the name column.
INSERT INTO authors(name) SELECT DISTINCT author FROM books;

# Confirm the success of this command by typing 
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM authors;

# add a column to the books table named author_id.
ALTER TABLE books ADD COLUMN author_id INT;

# This query will prepare a connection between the two tables. It works by running a subquery for every row in the books table. The subquery finds the author row that has a name matching the current book's author value. The id of that author row is then set as the value of the author_id property in the current book row.
UPDATE books SET author_id=author.id FROM (SELECT * FROM authors) AS author WHERE books.author = author.name;

#  modify the books table by removing the column named author.
ALTER TABLE books DROP COLUMN author;

# modify the data type of the author_id in the books table, setting it as a foreign key which references the primary key in the authors table.
ALTER TABLE books ADD CONSTRAINT fk_authors FOREIGN KEY (author_id) REFERENCES authors(id);